# Chapter 25
**1.** While Israel was staying at Shittim, the menfolk. profaned themselves by whoring with the Moabite women, **2.** who invited the menfolk to the sacrifices for their god. The menfolk partook of them and worshiped that god. **3.** Thus Israel attached itself to Baal-peor, and Hashem was incensed with Israel. **4.** Hashem said to Moses, “Take all the ringleaders and have them publicly impaled before Hashem, so that Hashem’s wrath may turn away from Israel.” **5.** So Moses said to Israel’s officials, “Each of you slay those of his men. who attached themselves to Baal-peor.” **6.** Just then a certain Israelite man came and brought a Midianite woman over to his companions, in the sight of Moses and of the whole Israelite community who were weeping at the entrance of the Tent of Meeting. **7.** When Phinehas, son of Eleazar son of Aaron the priest, saw this, he left the assembly and, taking a spear in his hand, **8.** he followed the Israelite man into the chamber and stabbed both of them, the Israelite man and the woman, through the belly. Then the plague against the Israelites was checked. **9.** Those who died of the plague numbered twenty-four thousand. **10.** Hashem spoke to Moses, saying, **11.** “Phinehas, son of Eleazar son of Aaron the priest, has turned back My wrath from the Israelites by displaying among them his passion for Me, so that I did not wipe out the Israelite people in My passion. **12.** Say, therefore, ‘I grant him My pact of friendship. **13.** It shall be for him and his descendants after him a pact of priesthood for all time, because he took impassioned action for his God, thus making expiation for the Israelites.’” **14.** The name of the Israelite man who was killed, the one who was killed with the Midianite woman, was Zimri son of Salu, chieftain of a Simeonite ancestral house. **15.** The name of the Midianite woman who was killed was Cozbi daughter of Zur; he was the tribal head of an ancestral house in Midian. **16.** Hashem spoke to Moses, saying, **17.** “Assail the Midianites and defeat them— **18.** for they assailed you by the trickery they practiced against you—because of the affair of Peor and because of the affair of their kinswoman Cozbi, daughter of the Midianite chieftain, who was killed at the time of the plague on account of Peor.” 
# Chapter 26
**1.** When the plague was over, Hashem said to Moses and to Eleazar son of Aaron the priest, **2.** “Take a census of the whole Israelite company [of fighters] from the age of twenty years up, by their ancestral houses, all Israelite males able to bear arms.” **3.** So Moses and Eleazar the priest, on the steppes of Moab, at the Jordan near Jericho, gave instructions about them, namely, **4.** those from twenty years up, as Hashem had commanded Moses. The [eligible male] descendants of the Israelites who came out of the land of Egypt were: **5.** Reuben, Israel’s first-born. Descendants of Reuben: [Of] Enoch, the clan of the Enochites; of Pallu, the clan of the Palluites; **6.** of Hezron, the clan of the Hezronites; of Carmi, the clan of the Carmites. **7.** Those are the clans of the Reubenites. The men enrolled came to 43,730. **8.** Born to Pallu: Eliab. **9.** The sons of Eliab were Nemuel, and Dathan and Abiram. These are the same Dathan and Abiram, chosen in the assembly, who agitated against Moses and Aaron as part of Korah’s band when they agitated against Hashem. **10.** Whereupon the earth opened its mouth and swallowed them up with Korah—when that band died, when the fire consumed the two hundred and fifty men—and they became an example. **11.** The sons of Korah, however, did not die. **12.** Descendants of Simeon by their clans: Of Nemuel, the clan of the Nemuelites; of Jamin, the clan of the Jaminites; of Jachin, the clan of the Jachinites; **13.** of Zerah, the clan of the Zerahites; of Saul, the clan of the Saulites. **14.** Those are the clans of the Simeonites; [men enrolled: ] 22,200. **15.** Descendants of Gad by their clans: Of Zephon, the clan of the Zephonites; of Haggi, the clan of the Haggites; of Shuni, the clan of the Shunites; **16.** of Ozni, the clan of the Oznites; of Eri, the clan of the Erites; **17.** of Arod, the clan of the Arodites; of Areli, the clan of the Arelites. **18.** Those are the clans of Gad’s descendants; men enrolled: 40,500. **19.** Born to Judah: Er and Onan. Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan. **20.** Descendants of Judah by their clans: Of Shelah, the clan of the Shelanites; of Perez, the clan of the Perezites; of Zerah, the clan of the Zerahites. **21.** Descendants of Perez: of Hezron, the clan of the Hezronites; of Hamul, the clan of the Hamulites. **22.** Those are the clans of Judah; men enrolled: 76,500. **23.** Descendants of Issachar by their clans: [Of] Tola, the clan of the Tolaites; of Puvah, the clan of the Punites; **24.** of Jashub, the clan of the Jashubites; of Shimron, the clan of the Shimronites. **25.** Those are the clans of Issachar; men enrolled: 64,300. **26.** Descendants of Zebulun by their clans: Of Sered, the clan of the Seredites; of Elon, the clan of the Elonites; of Jahleel, the clan of the Jahleelites. **27.** Those are the clans of the Zebulunites; men enrolled: 60,500. **28.** The sons of Joseph were Manasseh and Ephraim—by their clans. **29.** Descendants of Manasseh: Of Machir, the clan of the Machirites.—Machir begot Gilead.—Of Gilead, the clan of the Gileadites. **30.** These were the descendants of Gilead: [Of] Iezer, the clan of the Iezerites; of Helek, the clan of the Helekites; **31.** [of] Asriel, the clan of the Asrielites; [of] Shechem, the clan of the Shechemites; **32.** [of] Shemida, the clan of the Shemidaites; [of] Hepher, the clan of the Hepherites.— **33.** Now Zelophehad son of Hepher had no sons, only daughters. The names of Zelophehad’s daughters were Mahlah, Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah.— **34.** Those are the clans of Manasseh; men enrolled: 52,700. **35.** These are the descendants of Ephraim by their clans: Of Shuthelah, the clan of the Shuthelahites; of Becher, the clan of the Becherites; of Tahan, the clan of the Tahanites. **36.** These are the descendants of Shuthelah: Of Eran, the clan of the Eranites. **37.** Those are the clans of Ephraim’s descendants; men enrolled: 32,500. Those are the descendants of Joseph by their clans. **38.** The descendants of Benjamin by their clans: Of Bela, the clan of the Belaites; of Ashbel, the clan of the Ashbelites; of Ahiram, the clan of the Ahiramites; **39.** of Shephupham, the clan of the Shuphamites; of Hupham, the clan of the Huphamites. **40.** The sons of Bela were Ard and Naaman: [Of Ard,] the clan of the Ardites; of Naaman, the clan of the Naamanites. **41.** Those are the descendants of Benjamin by their clans; men enrolled: 45,600. **42.** These are the descendants of Dan by their clans: Of Shuham, the clan of the Shuhamites. Those are the clans of Dan, by their clans. **43.** All the clans of the Shuhamites; men enrolled: 64,400. **44.** Descendants of Asher by their clans: Of Imnah, the clan of the Imnites; of Ishvi, the clan of the Ishvites; of Beriah, the clan of the Beriites. **45.** Of the descendants of Beriah: Of Heber, the clan of the Heberites; of Malchiel, the clan of the Malchielites.— **46.** The name of Asher’s daughter was Serah.— **47.** These are the clans of Asher’s descendants; men enrolled: 53,400. **48.** Descendants of Naphtali by their clans: Of Jahzeel, the clan of the Jahzeelites; of Guni, the clan of the Gunites; **49.** of Jezer, the clan of the Jezerites; of Shillem, the clan of the Shillemites. **50.** Those are the clans of the Naphtalites, clan by clan; men enrolled: 45,400. **51.** This is the enrollment of the Israelite men: 601,730. **52.** Hashem spoke to Moses, saying, **53.** “Among these shall the land be apportioned as shares, according to the listed names: **54.** with larger groups increase the share, with smaller groups reduce the share. Each is to be assigned its share according to its enrollment. **55.** The land, moreover, is to be apportioned by lot; and the allotment shall be made according to the listings of their ancestral tribes. **56.** Each portion shall be assigned by lot, whether for larger or smaller groups.” **57.** This is the enrollment of the Levites by their clans: Of Gershon, the clan of the Gershonites; of Kohath, the clan of the Kohathites; of Merari, the clan of the Merarites. **58.** These are the clans of Levi: The clan of the Libnites, the clan of the Hebronites, the clan of the Mahlites, the clan of the Mushites, the clan of the Korahites.—Kohath begot Amram. **59.** The name of Amram’s wife was Jochebed daughter of Levi, who was born to Levi in Egypt; she bore to Amram Aaron and Moses and their sister Miriam. **60.** To Aaron were born Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar. **61.** Nadab and Abihu died when they offered alien fire before Hashem.— **62.** Their enrollment of 23,000 comprised all males from a month up. They were not part of the regular enrollment of the Israelites, since no share was assigned to them among the Israelites. **63.** These are the males enrolled by Moses and Eleazar the priest who registered the Israelites on the steppes of Moab, at the Jordan near Jericho. **64.** Among these there was not one of those enrolled by Moses and Aaron the priest when they recorded the Israelites in the wilderness of Sinai. **65.** For Hashem had said of them, “They shall die in the wilderness.” Not one of them survived, except Caleb son of Jephunneh and Joshua son of Nun. **66.** Porque Hashem tinha dito deles: Certamente morrerão no deserto; e não restou homem algum deles, exceto Calev, filho de Yefuneh, e Yehoshua, filho de Nun. {ס} 
# Chapter 27
**1.** The daughters of Zelophehad, of Manassite family—son of Hepher son of Gilead son of Machir son of Manasseh son of Joseph—came forward. The names of the daughters were Mahlah, Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah. **2.** They stood before Moses, Eleazar the priest, the chieftains, and the whole assembly, at the entrance of the Tent of Meeting, and they said, **3.** “Our father died in the wilderness. He was not one of the faction, Korah’s faction, which banded together against Hashem, but died for his own sin; and he has left no sons. **4.** Let not our father’s name be lost to his clan just because he had no son! Give us a holding among our father’s kinsmen!” **5.** Moses brought their case before Hashem. **6.** And Hashem said to Moses, **7.** “The plea of Zelophehad’s daughters is just: you should give them a hereditary holding among their father’s kinsmen; transfer their father’s share to them. **8.** “Further, speak to the Israelite people as follows: ‘If a householder. dies without leaving a son, you shall transfer his property to his daughter. **9.** If he has no daughter, you shall assign his property to his brothers. **10.** If he has no brothers, you shall assign his property to his father’s brothers. **11.** If his father had no brothers, you shall assign his property to his nearest relative in his own clan, who shall inherit it.’ This shall be the law of procedure for the Israelites, in accordance with Hashem’s command to Moses.” **12.** Hashem said to Moses, “Ascend these heights of Abarim and view the land that I have given to the Israelite people. **13.** When you have seen it, you too shall be gathered to your kin, just as your brother Aaron was. **14.** For, in the wilderness of Zin, when the community was contentious, you disobeyed My command to uphold My sanctity in their sight by means of the water.” Those are the Waters of Meribath-kadesh, in the wilderness of Zin. **15.** Moses spoke to Hashem, saying, **16.** “Let Hashem, Source of the breath of all flesh, appoint someone over the community **17.** who shall go out before them and come in before them, and who shall take them out and bring them in, so that Hashem’s community may not be like sheep that have no shepherd.” **18.** And Hashem answered Moses, “Single out Joshua son of Nun, an inspired man, and lay your hand upon him. **19.** Have him stand before Eleazar the priest and before the whole community, and commission him in their sight. **20.** Invest him with some of your authority, so that the whole Israelite community may obey. **21.** But he shall present himself to Eleazar the priest, who shall on his behalf seek the decision of the Urim before Hashem. By such instruction they shall go out and by such instruction they shall come in, he and all the Israelite [militia], and the whole community.” **22.** Moses did as Hashem commanded him. He took Joshua and had him stand before Eleazar the priest and before the whole community. **23.** He laid his hands upon him and commissioned him—as Hashem had spoken through Moses. 
# Chapter 28
**1.** Hashem spoke to Moses, saying: **2.** Command the Israelite people and say to them: Be punctilious in presenting to Me at stated times the offerings of food due Me, as offerings by fire of pleasing odor to Me. **3.** Say to them: These are the offerings by fire that you are to present to Hashem: As a regular burnt offering every day, two yearling lambs without blemish. **4.** You shall offer one lamb in the morning, and the other lamb you shall offer at twilight. **5.** And as a meal offering, there shall be a tenth of an ephah of choice flour with a quarter of a hin of beaten oil mixed in— **6.** the regular burnt offering instituted at Mount Sinai —an offering by fire of pleasing odor to Hashem. **7.** The libation with it shall be a quarter of a hin for each lamb, to be poured in the sacred precinct as an offering of fermented drink to Hashem. **8.** The other lamb you shall offer at twilight, preparing the same meal offering and libation as in the morning—an offering by fire of pleasing odor to Hashem. **9.** On the sabbath day: two yearling lambs without blemish, together with two-tenths of a measure. of choice flour with oil mixed in as a meal offering, and with the proper libation— **10.** a burnt offering for every sabbath, in addition to the regular burnt offering and its libation. **11.** On your new moons you shall present a burnt offering to Hashem: two bulls of the herd, one ram, and seven yearling lambs, without blemish. **12.** As meal offering for each bull: three-tenths of a measure of choice flour with oil mixed in. As meal offering for each ram: two-tenths of a measure of choice flour with oil mixed in. **13.** As meal offering for each lamb: a tenth of a measure of fine flour with oil mixed in. Such shall be the burnt offering of pleasing odor, an offering by fire to Hashem. **14.** Their libations shall be: half a hin of wine for a bull, a third of a hin for a ram, and a quarter of a hin for a lamb. That shall be the monthly burnt offering for each new moon of the year. **15.** And there shall be one goat as a sin offering to Hashem, to be offered in addition to the regular burnt offering and its libation. **16.** In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month, there shall be a passover sacrifice to Hashem, **17.** and on the fifteenth day of that month a festival. Unleavened bread shall be eaten for seven days. **18.** The first day shall be a sacred occasion: you shall not work at your occupations. **19.** You shall present an offering by fire, a burnt offering, to Hashem: two bulls of the herd, one ram, and seven yearling lambs—see that they are without blemish. **20.** The meal offering with them shall be of choice flour with oil mixed in: prepare three-tenths of a measure for a bull, two-tenths for a ram; **21.** and for each of the seven lambs prepare one-tenth of a measure. **22.** And there shall be one goat for a sin offering, to make expiation in your behalf. **23.** You shall present these in addition to the morning portion of the regular burnt offering. **24.** You shall offer the like daily for seven days as food, an offering by fire of pleasing odor to Hashem; they shall be offered, with their libations, in addition to the regular burnt offering. **25.** And the seventh day shall be a sacred occasion for you: you shall not work at your occupations. **26.** On the day of the first fruits, your Feast of Weeks, when you bring an offering of new grain to Hashem, you shall observe a sacred occasion: you shall not work at your occupations. **27.** You shall present a burnt offering of pleasing odor to Hashem: two bulls of the herd, one ram, seven yearling lambs. **28.** The meal offering with them shall be of choice flour with oil mixed in, three-tenths of a measure for a bull, two-tenths for a ram, **29.** and one-tenth for each of the seven lambs. **30.** And there shall be one goat for expiation in your behalf. **31.** You shall present them—see that they are without blemish—with their libations, in addition to the regular burnt offering and its meal offering. 
# Chapter 29
**1.** In the seventh month, on the first day of the month, you shall observe a sacred occasion: you shall not work at your occupations. You shall observe it as a day when the horn is sounded. **2.** You shall present a burnt offering of pleasing odor to Hashem: one bull of the herd, one ram, and seven yearling lambs, without blemish. **3.** The meal offering with them—choice flour with oil mixed in—shall be: three-tenths of a measure for a bull, two-tenths for a ram, **4.** and one-tenth for each of the seven lambs. **5.** And there shall be one goat for a sin offering, to make expiation in your behalf— **6.** in addition to the burnt offering of the new moon with its meal offering and the regular burnt offering with its meal offering, each with its libation as prescribed, offerings by fire of pleasing odor to Hashem. **7.** On the tenth day of the same seventh month you shall observe a sacred occasion when you shall practice self-denial. You shall do no work. **8.** You shall present to Hashem a burnt offering of pleasing odor: one bull of the herd, one ram, seven yearling lambs; see that they are without blemish. **9.** The meal offering with them—of choice flour with oil mixed in—shall be: three-tenths of a measure for a bull, two-tenths for the one ram, **10.** one-tenth for each of the seven lambs. **11.** And there shall be one goat for a sin offering, in addition to the sin offering of expiation and the regular burnt offering with its meal offering, each with its libation. **12.** On the fifteenth day of the seventh month, you shall observe a sacred occasion: you shall not work at your occupations.—Seven days you shall observe a festival of Hashem.— **13.** You shall present a burnt offering, an offering by fire of pleasing odor to Hashem: Thirteen bulls of the herd, two rams, fourteen yearling lambs; they shall be without blemish. **14.** The meal offerings with them—of choice flour with oil mixed in—shall be: three-tenths of a measure for each of the thirteen bulls, two-tenths for each of the two rams, **15.** and one-tenth for each of the fourteen lambs. **16.** And there shall be one goat for a sin offering—in addition to the regular burnt offering, its meal offering and libation. **17.** Second day: Twelve bulls of the herd, two rams, fourteen yearling lambs, without blemish; **18.** the meal offerings and libations for the bulls, rams, and lambs, in the quantities prescribed; **19.** and one goat for a sin offering—in addition to the regular burnt offering, its meal offering and libations. **20.** Third day: Eleven bulls, two rams, fourteen yearling lambs, without blemish; **21.** the meal offerings and libations for the bulls, rams, and lambs, in the quantities prescribed; **22.** and one goat for a sin offering—in addition to the regular burnt offering, its meal offering and libation. **23.** Fourth day: Ten bulls, two rams, fourteen yearling lambs, without blemish; **24.** the meal offerings and libations for the bulls, rams, and lambs, in the quantities prescribed; **25.** and one goat for a sin offering—in addition to the regular burnt offering, its meal offering and libation. **26.** Fifth day: Nine bulls, two rams, fourteen yearling lambs, without blemish; **27.** the meal offerings and libations for the bulls, rams, and lambs, in the quantities prescribed; **28.** and one goat for a sin offering—in addition to the regular burnt offering, its meal offering and libation. **29.** Sixth day: Eight bulls, two rams, fourteen yearling lambs, without blemish; **30.** the meal offerings and libations for the bulls, rams, and lambs, in the quantities prescribed; **31.** and one goat for a sin offering—in addition to the regular burnt offering, its meal offering and libations. **32.** Seventh day: Seven bulls, two rams, fourteen yearling lambs, without blemish; **33.** the meal offerings and libations for the bulls, rams, and lambs, in the quantities prescribed; **34.** and one goat for a sin offering—in addition to the regular burnt offering, its meal offering and libation. **35.** On the eighth day you shall hold a solemn gathering; uncertain. Cf. Lev. 23.36; Deut. 16.8. you shall not work at your occupations. **36.** You shall present a burnt offering, an offering by fire of pleasing odor to Hashem; one bull, one ram, seven yearling lambs, without blemish; **37.** the meal offerings and libations for the bull, the ram, and the lambs, in the quantities prescribed; **38.** and one goat for a sin offering—in addition to the regular burnt offering, its meal offering and libation. **39.** All these you shall offer to Hashem at the stated times, in addition to your votive and freewill offerings, be they burnt offerings, meal offerings, libations, or offerings of well-being. 
# Chapter 30
**1.** So Moses spoke to the Israelites just as Hashem had commanded Moses. **2.** Moses spoke to the heads of the Israelite tribes, saying: This is what Hashem has commanded: **3.** If a householder. makes a vow to Hashem or takes an oath imposing an obligation on himself, he shall not break his pledge; he must carry out all that has crossed his lips. **4.** If a woman can denote girls within its scope, as here and in 31.18, 35; Judg. 21.14. makes a vow to Hashem or assumes an obligation while still in her father’s household by reason of her youth, **5.** and her father learns of her vow or her self-imposed obligation and offers no objection, all her vows shall stand and every self-imposed obligation shall stand. **6.** But if her father restrains her on the day he finds out, none of her vows or self-imposed obligations shall stand; and Hashem will forgive her, since her father restrained her. **7.** If she should become someone’s [wife] while her vow or the commitment to which she bound herself is still in force, **8.** and her husband learns of it and offers no objection on the day he finds out, her vows shall stand and her self-imposed obligations shall stand. **9.** But if her husband restrains her on the day that he learns of it, he thereby annuls her vow which was in force or the commitment to which she bound herself; and Hashem will forgive her.— **10.** The vow of a widow or of a divorced woman, however, whatever she has imposed on herself, shall be binding upon her.— **11.** So, too, if, while in her husband’s household, she makes a vow or imposes an obligation on herself by oath, **12.** and her husband learns of it, yet offers no objection—thus failing to restrain her—all her vows shall stand and all her self-imposed obligations shall stand. **13.** But if her husband does annul them on the day he finds out, then nothing that has crossed her lips shall stand, whether vows or self-imposed obligations. Her husband has annulled them, and Hashem will forgive her. **14.** Every vow and every sworn obligation of self-denial may be upheld by her husband or annulled by her husband. **15.** If her husband offers no objection from that day to the next, he has upheld all the vows or obligations she has assumed: he has upheld them by offering no objection on the day he found out. **16.** But if he annuls them after [the day] he finds out, he shall bear her guilt. **17.** Those are the laws that Hashem enjoined upon Moses between a husband and his wife, and as between a father and his daughter while in her father’s household by reason of her youth.